Everybody, everybody hear me?
Everybody hear me?
All right. If anybody doesn't know me,
my name is Jeff Bur. I'm the uh
vice president. Vice President, vice
vers. Um I'd like to call this um Tom
Andover annual budget meeting to order.
Um first thing I'm going to do is read
the agenda.
The electors and citizens qualified to
vote in the town meeting town of Andover
are hereby notified that the annual
budget meeting of the town of Andover
will be held at the Andover Elementary
School in the Chyasium 35 School Road
Andover Connecticut on Wednesday, April
9th, 2025 at 7:00 p.m. for the following
purposes. Number one, choose the
moderator for set meeting. Two, to
receive the budget for the fiscal year
July 1st, 2025 to June 30th, 2026 as
prepared by the board of finance to
approve the budget for the fiscal year
July 1st, 2025 to June 30th, 2026. And
four is adjourned. Copies of the budget
are available in the town clerk's
office. Voting by absentee ballot is not
permitted for this meeting. Dated Andor,
Connecticut, this day, 26 of March,
2025. Sign the work order selection.
Agenda item number one to choose the
moderator for set of meeting. Do I have
any nominations?
Second.
Nominated by the motion and second it
needs the information.
Martin motion session.
Okay. All in favor of Molly Martin for
moderator.
Opposed? Motion carries. All you have
for Thank you. Couple of items just to
bring everybody up for speed. At this
meeting, the only thing that can happen
in the budget is the items may be
reduced. You cannot add to any line item
at this
meeting. Secondly, at the end of this
meeting, you don't technically approve
the budget because the budget goes to
referendum at the end of this
meeting. You
can request to reduce a line item by a
specific dollar amount in the form of a
motion that has to be seconded. then
it's open for debate and then voted on.
As far as the handover school budget,
you
cannot do anything with the line items
only the bottom line of that budget. And
again, RAM is voting on Ref Brendom. It
will not really have a discussion here
tonight. So with that, turn it over to
the board of finance for their
presentation.
Thank you, Wall-E. Um, thank you
everybody for being here tonight. Uh, my
name is Mark Winter. I'm the chair for
the uh, town of Andover Board of
Finance. Um, I guess on behalf of the
selection and the board of education,
especially the board of finance, I
wanted to thank you all for being here
tonight. Uh, this is a big team effort.
First of all, along the three boards,
you all put a lot of time and effort
into this process, and you're part of
the team now, too. Uh it's important.
This is how it gets done. So, thank you
for your
participation. All right, I'm going to
go through a presentation. Uh if you
would uh you can hold up your hand if
you have questions, but I'd like to get
through most of this and then you can
we'll have a question and answer period.
Uh so hopefully it'll be fairly clear. I
know some of the text is hard to read
and uh you have printouts in front of
you. You might need a magnifying glass
to read them, but the data is there. So,
uh thanks very much.
I'll go ahead and get started.
So, um this is our agenda from the at
least the board of finances
presentation. We're going to go through
the budget process. Um talk a little bit
about that. We're going to go through
the expenditures. So, we have uh three
main expenditures in our town budget. uh
the RAM uh expenditure for education and
over elementary school expenditures and
then the town uh budget includes both
capital and operating
expenses. We'll talk about the revenue
that the town brings in the revenue out
of the taxes
uh and we'll have a quick summary talk
about the capital plan for the next few
years. So this is this is a little
different. We haven't done this in any
real detail over the last couple of
years. We've attended the meetings
there, but it is it is something that is
in the chart and so we're making sure we
meet that obligation. We'll keep it as
brief as
possible. We'll have a question and
answer period and then it's Ronald
mentioned what you can entertain motions
to uh accept the budget to change budget
um line items. Uh again, as you say, we
can only do specific line items.
Okay, just talking about the budget
process. I won't spend a lot of time on
this to bore you to tears uh you know
about a storm before we ever got to the
thing. But we we have a preliminary town
operating budget. This is submitted to
the selectment. Uh first it actually
first is I should back up there's a lot
of work goes on ahead of time. Uh the
town administrator prepares the budget
template along with the treasurer goes
out to all the departments. They bring
out their proposed budget for their
departments. Uh basically zerobased
budgeting. They build the budget from
there and then it goes to the select the
selectman and the board of finance have
an opportunity to make changes as they
do. Um ultimately they present that to
the board of finance. We go out from
there. Um Whoops.
Uh separately the Andover Elementary uh
board of education presents their
requested budget that becomes part of
the overall budget. Uh the revised
operating budget is submitted to the
board of finance. So that's been when we
take over. We received the budget to
begin our review. So that happened over
many uh several months and I know a lot
of you know we had a lot of a lot of
meetings to go over this. Uh finally uh
this happened last week before a
financial public hearing on a budget. We
actually just take comments in for the
public. Of course public speak at all of
our meetings. So you also have an
opportunity contribute at that point or
email any of us at any
time. Uh then we finalized the
recommended budget uh for the town
meeting tonight and then have you follow
public hearing and that's where we are
today. Uh there is also a separate grant
budget referendum and I just wanted to
point that out but Wally already
discussed it so that's not really part
of our
discussion. Quick budget breakout by
entity. Again the three main
contributors to the town budget. I know
this is difficult to see but they're
they're very equal in terms of their
contribution. The town operating budget
is about 32% annual report of education
is 36% and the RAM budget is about
32%. Okay, this is our proposed budget
for the 2025 2026 fiscal year. Uh it's
13,62,497. That's uh about 2.8% more
than the current approved
budget. for the budget that we approved
at the meeting last year. All right. Um
the various elements of that are in this
uh the board of educations budget at 4,7
29,150 change of 381,000 roughly uh an
increase of about 8.8%. Uh the RAM
middle school high school budget
recommended uh or actually the budgeting
for the RAM. This is just a line on
visual change or act on is
$4,135,532. Uh it's actually a decrease
of
14,754 minus4%. We'll talk about the
reasons for that in a moment. And then
we have the town budget which is set at
$4,197,89.
Okay, that's a slight decrease of
$104,818. Okay, we're about 2.4% down
from last year's approved
budget. Um, first just a little review
of the Andover Elementary School budget.
Uh, this is set uh by the Andover Board
of Education. It's not something the
board of finance uh gets too involved in
other than to have a review of the
budget with the boarding superintendent.
Uh so already talked about their their
number for this year. The year their
approved number is
725. Uh this is an 8.8% increase uh from
the 2425 budget. Uh the main drivers for
that increase. I hope I got this right.
Maybe the members of the superintendent
to answer specific questions you may
have. Uh we had new staff in the budget.
There's about 3.1 I think FTE. Okay. And
then uh there's a benefits increase
along with that. Some of the contractual
and things some of it's new hires and
then there's some also technical
licenses and stuff they're
driving. Okay. The RAM budget levy. So
the RAM budget levy as you said is voted
on with a separate budget reform. Uh so
we will have a separate vote on that. U
doesn't happen here but it's it's a part
we have to uh uh spend next year. So
just flying over that make sure you
understand it. Um so the overall brand
budget is
$32,620,000 roughly. That's a 2.6%
increase. Uh but our levy is about that
is 4,237 347. So our our levy decreased
our percentage decreased from 13.43% to
12.99%. So that's why the RAM budget is
actually going down this year for us.
It's because the percentage of Andover
students at Ram decrease relative to the
other towns. So that'll change year to
year depending on how many Andover
students are going to the uh RAM schools
versus uh even in our way. You know, in
a different year, it's going to be a
different time. So that does
fluctuate. In addition, RAM returned
portion of the prior surplus to the
towns rather than sucking it away as I
think they had the the right to do with
the law. uh they looked at it and
decided that they could do that and so
there's actually a coming
$101,000 I know
that's over total leverage for rent is
41 135,532
uh which is an overall decrease as I
said about
4074 okay town we're going
to the right in front of there. I'll
talk about some of the differences the
drivers there. So the this is the town
budget uh not including on the
educational expenses and separate. We do
have two main components. One is the
operating budget. This is just the money
that we spend every uh every year to
keep the town running and providing
services. The other part of it is the
capital budget. So that's the budget for
major capital expenditures. the big
things we have to purchase at fire
truck, public works equipment, you know,
community center, all of those things
are typically covered in capital
funding, road work, tree work,
etc. So, first talk about the operating
limit. This is our expenditures uh just
a year ago to provide the daily services
that provides. We have an overall
increase this year uh from
3,39,000 roughly to
3,194,000. It's about 155 $5,000
increase roughly about a 5% increase.
Okay. Uh the main factors contributing
to the budget, there are some staff
salary increases per the
contract. This is what we paid. Um we
had two contractors at the transfer
station. Haven't had them for a long
time. The Ugender was only fulfilling us
for one. So they figured that one out
and now we're paying for two. So
that's there's about $10,000 stat right
there. Uh we added uh part-time
assistant for the addition uh addition
the digital assistant the uh community
center. That's about $11,000 cost. Uh
the state trooper costs increased about
$14,000. This isn't something we have
control over. the town decided to uh
have a state trooper, resident state
trooper. Uh we we get whatever uh state
trooper they assign to us and that
number will change year to year
depending on that person's
seniority. Uh brush pile removal, this
is about
$20,000. This is not something you do
every year. It's something we do
probably three years. So this year we
need to have that brush power to invest.
go to the transfer station, you get down
to your brush. We have to have that
removed. Again, we don't do it every
year. It's more cost effective to do it
once every 3
[Applause]
years. And then we did have actually
reduction in our timing fees. These are
the costs uh for actually taking the uh
trash transfer station. So sometimes how
many years they go up and recently
they've gone down. So that's a good
thing to offset that.
So we're actually kind of fortunate
actually this year there isn't a lot
that's going on in that budget to to
change things for us for the town
operating. So considering inflation and
everything else uh we're doing okay
doing pretty well. You look at the
budget and a lot of very small changes
line stands out. So
consider okay capital budget. So this is
where we put a lot of money to various
funds to pay for the again larger
expenses that the town
incurs are decreasing our capital budget
this year. We're reducing the
contributions to the major funds in this
budget. Um still maintains as we have
here a pretty strong commitment to
repairing or replacing the
infrastructure mostly roads and bridge
work related.
Um, some of you may remember we we
actually had a significant increase last
year and I think the year before to help
better fund the town uh road uh you know
better fund the town road uh because we
had neglected for a very long time and
our commitment was to try to to not have
that increase year-over-year but to get
to a level that made sense we can
actually maintain the roads in decent
condition. So we think that's where we
are. We have not made any big uh
adjustments to the county
road. In fact, we actually reduced it a
little bit by about
$50,000. Uh we also had a change for the
fund. There's an element, excuse me,
Andover Elementary School Capital Fund.
We established this last year. Uh put
about $100,000 of seed money in it. Uh
this was a problem prior because the
elementary school did not have any way
to fund major projects. just didn't have
it set up for them. They don't have a
means to have a capital fund uh
separately from the town. So, we had to
set one up in the town to make sure that
we could fund the major projects. And
there's there's a lot of them that have
to happen at the schools. We all
recognize
that. So, we didn't fund that this year.
Uh instead, most of the funding for the
AES capital fund is coming from any
surplus that comes from the school
budget. Okay. And we actually had quite
a bit uh following the audit this year
about
$360,000 returned to that
fund. We also reduced the uh amount to
the building maintenance fund by about
$67,000 and we reduced the amount going
to the open space fund uh by about
$40,000.
The open space fund, uh, by the way,
that's what we use if there happens to
come up a parcel for sale that the town
wishes to acquire to maintain open space
as opposed to having to use for
development. That that money is used to
potentially purchase
that. Okay, this is just a pie chart for
capital contributions. You know, big
yellow chunk in the bottom. That's a
improvement fund. That's where most of
the funding goes. It's a big source of
funding. Uh the next one is the uh
public works equipment fund. And then
the orange one on the upper right corner
is the fire protection fund. That's
that's most of them have really
obligated decisions as a town at town
meetings to purchase for example new
tank and we have about 10 years worth of
payments to make. So that's just
got okay and again just to break down
our major contributions of the big
numbers our fire department fire
department equipment was 137,000 public
works equipment
125,000 road improvement
360,000 this year induction
400 free removal uh 50,000 and then the
bridge and pulker repair replacement at
175 5
minutes. Most of you have probably seen
signs up for the uh Buckingham Road
replacement or some of the others that
are pending. Those are long overdue and
we got to bank our lucky stars and most
of those are being funded uh by the
state or by federal government and we
have to do some matching funds in some
cases or we have to pay for the design
effort in some cases. We really get a
lot of work done and paid for by the
state.
revenue. Um, not going to go into too
much detail here. There's many sources
of revenue. Uh, they're listed, I think,
in your budget spreadsheet. Again, with
the magnifying glass, uh, we have
interest. This is a big one. We're
making about $150,000 on interest
bearing accounts. Uh, again, thanks to
our treasurer and our town
administrator, Eric, uh, found a stiff
account opportunity and we we now put
our money into interesting accounts.
Interest rates have been pretty high the
last couple years. We've done pretty
well. Probably they'll go down this
year, but we'll see how it goes. Uh
state and federal grants. We get grants
from the federal government and state
educational cost sharing is a big one.
Uh the state uh does educational funds
uh to help smaller towns and other
disadvantaged municipalities um help
balance the uh educational opportunities
in the state. Uh they get cut this year.
We hope maybe they'll grow again, but
we'll see. Permits and
fees. I just uh had solar installed on
my house and get a permit there. So,
that's where we even some money on
renovations in your
building. Uh also, your transfer fee,
you go to the transfer station, you want
to get your sticker. Uh overall, the
revenues are pretty flat this year. Very
little change. About $4,000 there. Not
much change.
Okay, so summarize summarize to
summarize if I didn't I know I went
through this fairly quickly um but again
you should have it in front of you uh
the uh elementary school uh at 4.7
million roughly 8.8% increase where I am
at 4.1 million u minus.4 for and the
town overall budget. Uh again, our
operating budget went up in the town,
but because we decreased the funding of
the capital accounts, uh overall it
actually is going down slightly by about
$100,000. You also are going to use some
of the fund balance. The fund balance is
some of the extra money that's left in
the town. You can think of it as a
contingency fund um that we use in case
of major emergencies, crisis, natural
disasters, etc. Um, so we are going to
use some of that money. We find that we
got more than we probably need in there.
We're going to use some of that money to
offset some of the increases this
year. And then uh this leaves the
remaining total by taxation at about
$10,255. Sorry, $10,255,000.
10 million
million 10
million255,000 there 5507 I've been
looking at straight for about 3 days
um that's an increase of about 204,000
$25,000 overall
um which is about a 2.1% increase
overall
okay now let's talk about the mill rate
this could be confusing so I know a lot
of you have heard this full uh depending
on these times, but I just want to
explain it. So, the mill rate is a
percentage. It's just a it's just a
ratio that is multiplied by your
personal property value to get your tax.
Okay? So, the mill rate is based on the
valuation of the property in town. Okay?
Now the state p state legislature passed
a law this year where they changed the
way that vehicles are valued and in most
cases it reduced the value of vehicles
in town. So what that does is reduce the
brand list overall. So vehicle values
went down uh your your own value is
assessed value is what it is that didn't
change. So that actually reduced our
grand list which is the kind of
evaluation of all the problems we have.
So we use that uh that grand list which
is on the line right here and about $316
million. Uh that's what we have to base
our
tax. So when your total expenditures are
about $13 million, our uh estimated
revenue is about $2.6 million. We're
going to use the fund balance and then
we have an offsetting payment and
exemptions. These are exemptions to
certain taxes that are uh given to
believe it's the fire department in some
case disabled veterans. I got that right
here.
Correct. So the total you raised by
taxes again I'll say it right this time
10,255,557. Uh and then there's the
grand list. That means the one mill that
is
360,000. Again, you don't really need to
worry too much about the man that is
whatever. Uh, but the mill rate is
32.39. Now, the increase there over last
year is
2.95%. It doesn't mean your taxes are
going up 2.95%. It just means that the
mill rate. So, in most cases, for most
of us, your model uh property tax, other
property tax other than your house is
going to be reduced. So, the mill rate
just increases the tax rate.
Okay. And then finally our total
taxation is determined by the total
budget offset by the revenue calculation
rate is
32.39 which again is up above
0.95%. Uh just as an
example this is solely a theoretical
example to your house value. The house
that's assessed at $200,000 will pay
about
$6,478 in taxes. Okay. So, pointing out
also, I just want to make this point. As
I said, for most taxpayers, your vehicle
taxes will probably go down relative to
where they were under the last valuation
process. Uh, but your overall taxation
will
keep. So, again, that leaves us with an
overall tax increase for the town at
about 2.1%.
Okay, now just a couple of quick slides
of the capital plan. This is looking
down the road. Uh it's important and I
don't think we've all just done enough
of this. U so kudos to the selectman uh
and to Eric and everybody who's been
involved in really you know helping us
encouraging us to look down the road and
do some better planning. Okay. Um 25 26
we've got a lot of projects in. We
already talked about one of them. That's
the Bumber Hill Road bridge
construction. Again, 80% federal, 20%
state funding. Uh we still had to put
out quite a bit of money for design and
other uh other parts of that, but all in
all, it's a great bargain. Um we're also
looking at Lake Road and just road uh
Culver replacement. Uh should get that
underway in the summer of 2026. Uh and
that's about 50% state funded. The rest
we'll take from our bridge and culbert
fund. We need to look at uh uh updating
municipal generator uh covered the whole
community complex uh here the town hall
community center not we have a separate
system there and we're submitting trying
to get congressional funding for fiscal
year 26
on road work. We always have they never
update that right two seasons winter
construction. So we're working into
construction longterm 2027 2031 long
hill road construction. Again we're
anticipating 2027 80% federal 20% state
funding. We're going to have to put up
some design work money and uh we also
have to pay for that ahead of get
reimbursed but So far the feds have been
good.
Um culvert replacement. We have a lot of
different culverts that need replacing.
Some are in really poor condition
failing. We need to consider on that. Um
again they just pull the generator back
up and we'll see where that gets. Might
need to be a little more project. And
then we've got some additional projects.
Most of these are smaller. We don't it's
advanced plan. Uh we looked at doors and
ceiling for the Andover Museum. uh
rebuilding the chimney on the
library, re- roofing the gazebo here on
the green up front
with
IC
tools. So that's our capital plan. It's
giving you an overview for the next few
years. So um I think this is all
correct. We had a couple of language
changes this year. Uh but just to remind
you about the process here, Rally talked
about it. I talked about it. Um, but
we're at the town budget meeting. Now,
for the charter, we uh can take the vote
to adopt the budget to make amendments
to the proposed budget. However, the
town meeting shall only have the power
to reduce or modify, but not increase
the budget or any portion thereof. Okay.
The town meeting may not alter any
specific items contained in the budget
proposed by the local board of
education. and the town meeting shall
adjourn to a ref referendum to be held
on Tuesday following the first town
meeting. So we'll go to the question and
answer period. Uh members of the board
selection, board of ed and board of
finance are here. We'll do our best to
answer the question you have. Hopefully
you'll be able to follow along following
along a little bit in the process
already. I know it's complicated. We all
need busy lives. Uh but uh this is our
chance. Uh please use the
microphone and uh state your name and
street address for the meeting.
Okay, hand it back
over again and then we have since
there's so many people here that you
comments to with this three
minutes and once you've spoken and move
around other speakers before we go
back so that one person at a time on
this entire
meeting. So we'll open it up first for
question five minutes. Someone want to
raise it again and I'll see you with
microphone. You have a question.
Hi, my name is about
ask. Um, my first question is about the
line in here from advertising. What I've
never seen over advertised anywhere. So,
I'm kind of wondering what that $6,000
for advertising is. Um, and the other
one that I was wondering about is the
beautifification that went up like a
considerable amount and what they
planned on beautififications during the
town. with that network of six running
rate. One more question. I notice
considerable increases they said by
contract. So I'm wondering if everybody
who's employed by the town that's
getting an increase, are they all under
contract or are there any non-union
people getting increases this year?
Thank you.
That's not a word of finance question. I
can't on the on the advertising.
legal roads that are required such as
the one that announced the legal town of
this and I think planning zoning
commission and others told staff to
legally advertise
similar
I'll
answer so the first one was regarding
the beautifification committee uh the
beautifification committee asked for
money to do two things.
The first is to address uh and continue
to do plantings at the community center.
And the second thing is there uh the
board of selection and board of finance
have approved a second welcome to
andover sign and that covers the cost of
hiring a contractor to do plantings and
a little wall around both of those new
signs. That was the vacation request.
What's the third one?
Got it. So, there's there's basically
um four flavors of town employees. The
first are people who are governed by
union contract. That is actually the
majority of the full-time employees.
There are people that have individual
employment contracts. That is typically
the
uh essentially the the senior staff if
you would put it that way, which would
be myself, the director of public works,
the director of the Andover Library, and
the director of the community center.
And then there's everybody who is not an
elected official um but is a town
employee. Um the everybody that's in the
category of being an elected official
but not a town employee, it is the board
of selectman that sets salary and
compensation for those individuals. Um
everybody that is an elected official,
their salary and compensation is set by
the board of finance. Does that answer
your question? Not really.
I asked everybody on here who was
getting raises if they were union
employees. The answer is no. They had
contracts if they were union employees
is what I asked. So, are you a union
employee? I am not a union employee.
Okay. Are the town clerks union
employees?
The town clerk is not a union employee.
the assistant town clerk, who's the
acting town clerk in the absence of a
town clerk, which we don't have at the
moment, is a union employee.
And all of these guys who work down
town, they're all union employees. Uh,
no. Four of the five members of public
works are union employees. The
supervisor is not a union employee. We
tend to not have any supervisors
uh in the union of the employees that
they supervise.
And has meals and mileage always been
covered for these people?
So meals and
mileage is covered under winter
conditions when they are snow plowing
and when they're working beyond a normal
workday. Um, so yes, that has always
been um that's been in the union
contracts for at least the last 15 years
and I don't know past that.
Next, please. Anyone?
Uh, Donald Denny side. Um so for many
years we operated in public works the
three three
positions and now we have five as we've
grown under this current administration
and I'm looking at
$312,000 in salaries and I was wondering
if we could break out those numbers
approximately and let us know how much
the foreman is making and how much our
individual public works people are
Maggie, one of the questions is the
community center, which I'm a big fan
of. I worked for many years and on a
committee to bring us a community
center. We never had one in town this
side of the
river. So, we have limited hours that
the community center was open. And when
I see limited activity, yet we're paying
a 26-hour a week person 40
$45,000. And now scheduled for a
raise. And we have a a new proposal for
a part-time assistant in another
$11,000. Just seems like
$58,000 to run our community center is a
bit excessive. I just like to maybe get
some comments from the board of finance
and go to the board of selectment on
them on that. But Eric, do I ask for you
the salaries for the public works
people? Can we get that from you or we
get that from them? Uh so I can tell you
approximately the public works
supervisor makes approximately $95,000 a
year. I can't tell you down with the
penny. Um we're fine. Uh and then
currently we have we have one maintainer
one on staff, one maintainer two
correction two people at the maintainer
two rank and the third is at the
maintainer three level and those
salaries
range. Good question. I can tell you an
hourly wage a maintainer one makes
around $21 an hour. A maintainer two
makes around
$26 an hour and a maintainer three makes
around $28 an hour.
I think Eric would still give you the
best answer.
It wasn't about Eric.
Yeah, I wasn't at the board of selection
meeting when they made those decisions.
Uh so those decisions are typically made
at board of selection meetings uh in
conjunction with the town administrator.
So that was based on their request about
the best possible funding and use. The
belief is that the uh current community
center director is has her hands full.
Uh we do hope to continue utilizing that
even more and uh thought thinking there
was a need to be funded at a higher
level with more hours.
Hi. I'm not going to, you know, go
against what Mark said because we're a
united board, of course. Um, I think the
salaries because we spent a lot of time
studying all the spreadsheets and all of
this information painstakingly. I have a
few things to bring up this evening. I
think they're a little higher for the um
public works employees. So I think
that's, you know, I think a lowest one
is in the 50,000 a year range going up
to the
62,000.
So, you know, not to go against what Mr.
Anderson said. And then we did have a
meeting where I was present last year
when we did send um set the salary for
the senior center, new community center
director, which we were all excited to
finally have the senior center.
community center in town and there, you
know, there was a salary set of a
certain amount by the board of finance
for a full-time person. I mean, that's
on record. It's inance. So, that was the
expectation of that. They've since added
a part-time person. Um, so that'll be up
to, you know, the community, but I just
wanted to give you my viewpoint of what
I've been studying.
Scott Silia in Boston Road.
Just a comment, not a question. Um the I
for some reason I spent a lot of time
looking at the charter the last 6
months, eight months. Um could be a lot
of people remember why.
Um,
and I I noticed that the uh section
802E3 describes how the the budget is
supposed to be presented and they talk
about a five column format that we
haven't done lately and did not do again
this year. And I just think we either
should change the charter to fix that to
adopt what we're doing or actually go
back to what's in there. That's all.
Yes.
Marcy Miner West Street. Um I have a
question for the board of finance and I
have one for the floor selection. I will
ask that one
later. Um, from what I understand, we
have three branches of government here
in the Andover. We have the board of
education that oversees the Yawware
Elementary School. We have the board of
selectmen that oversees the entire town.
And we have the board of finance that
oversees the spending of the other three
boards. Is a board of finance that is
essentially the town's financial arm. As
far as I can
understand, we elect these members and
we expect them to keep an eye on
finances of the other two boards.
They're they represent us and we trust
them to watch over things for
us. Um I understand these volunteers
work very hard and I've seen and been to
the meetings and we know that you guys
work really hard. Um, you're smart,
hardworking. So, I understand that
sometimes you might not feel like
looking too deep into your finances.
It's so much more fun to give people
what they want. It's especially hard
when you look at things and the
receiving end bullies you and makes you
feel bad for asking the hard questions.
I've seen with my own eyes bullying and
the name calling in these boards. While
I expect hard feelings when people don't
get what they want, the bullying and
gaslighting is not what we should have.
What we we towns people want is the
board of finance to expect the other two
boards to spend wisely and to be
respectful of the town's people by
choosing restraint with their budgets.
What I'm seeing though is the board of
finance spending hours upon hours going
to the town's budget on a fine tooth
comb and then swiftly sending the board
of education budget right through to
this meeting. There was discussion about
this
and Mark you tried to say we're not
allowed you're not allowed to touch it.
This may be true. However, you know that
you can make requests for the board to
use restraint. What I'm seeing here is a
total disregard for the town's people.
The board of education has increased
their spending significantly year after
year. They have so much more money that
they're looking for places to spend it.
And now they're currently asking for
8.8%
increase. This, I feel, is spitted in in
the face of the town's people. I'm going
to ask you a question and I want down
because I'm not the only one that wants
to answer this. Mark, why did you not
discuss the board of ed budget and what
will you do to get the board of
education to reduce its budget?
It's a fair question. I mean, I'll say
that right up front. The charter is very
clear. board of ed or the board of
finance may not make changes to the
board of education budget. Okay. Um
certainly you we have questioned in many
cases the superintendent and the board
of ed on their spending. Um I'm not
going to speak for the entire board of
finance. Um you know
it's we have limited uh ability and
limited leverage to make a lot of
changes. I will say that we we cannot
make any changes. Actually, all we can
do is advise. Is that where we want to
spend our time arguing with them? You
know, we do sometimes. Uh I would agree
that we do spend some times uh
challenging them. Um we haven't always
been happy with the answers. Uh but
ultimately I think that the main thing
if you want to reduce the uh spending of
the education budget is to propose the
change in tonight's meeting and or to go
to the board of education meetings where
the original budget is approved. That's
really where these changes should be
addressed. Okay. I mean I I don't
disagree that it's our role to provide
some oversight question. You know we're
not always happy with what we've got
from the board of you know that's that's
on record. Um, but I think that's where
these changes really need to be
addressed. That's my
So Marcy, I would just add to um fact
that we really don't have any control
over that budget. We are aware that it
is a a goodsized increase this year and
the board took a hard look at all the
other budgets and you can see that we
actually have a lower operating budget
this year. We cut a lot of things uh
open space fund, road fund, many other
things, some salaries. So it's not we're
just like don't care about you. We did
know that there's a big increase coming
on the board. So we cut back the
operating budget as much as we could
without hurting the town. So we do care
and tried to get the budget as low as we
could on the operating side. We have no
control over the education budget.
May something.
Hi. Um, I'm Kate Greenhouse. I'm the
chair of the board of ed currently. So,
I I would just use this as a moment to
say we do have budget meetings for the
board of ed as well. They're open to the
public. We have an email available for
people to send um questions and comments
while we're working on the budget and
it's typically presented through a
couple of workshops and then presented
at a meeting and then we vote on it on
the following meeting the following
month. So there's plenty of time for us
to get feedback from towns people and we
have struggled for years to get people
involved or interested in the board of
ed budget until it comes to this meeting
tonight. And I would just encourage all
of you that have questions about it and
concerns and would like to give input to
please come sooner and give that input
and help us come up with a budget and
understand what goes into it and
understand what the components are to
teach our children. Thank you.
[Applause]
Hi, I'm Val Berno. I am the
superintendent here. Um, one thing that
I wanted to add when we're looking at
the budget and almost every one of
Mark's slides until the very last one
actually labeled our budget accurately.
It said that it was the Andover Board of
Education budget. The last slide said
Andover Elementary School. And the one
thing that I would like to point out is
we are a small town and we are only one
school. And so it says Andover
Elementary School, but I really want to
point out the fact that that budget is
an operational budget and it includes
everything related to educating the kids
that attend AES and also all of the
expenses related to this largest
building in town. So that budget is a
budget that is not only to educate the
kids, but it's to run and operate 35
school road. And remember, even things
like the lights being on tonight when
we're not in school session, we paid out
of bill. The heat, we paid out of bill.
Everything related to 35 school road is
in that budget. all of the 3 to 12 year
old kids all the way up until sixth
grade. If they attend a charter or
magnet school, it's in that budget. So,
there's a lot of things that go into
that budget. It's not just the dayto-day
educating of the kids that are in this
building. So, it is quite a large
budget. It's a bigger increase this
year. Um, last year it was the town side
at 16 and this year it's us. And it's
unfortunate that it has to happen in one
year, but I did want you to be aware
that all of the expenses of that budget
are everything 35 school. Thank you.
Next, Jeff Ballard, uh, Lake Road,
Andover. And
uh I think it's my understanding that
the only way the town's people can
separate
the AES budget from the town budget is
if this fails twice and then they get
separated. Is that correct?
So if it's defeated tonight, then it is
separate. That referend that referendum.
Okay. Thank you. It's bifurcated. If you
fail at referendum,
the way it's worded is if a majority of
those voting at the referendum shall
vote no, then the proposed budget is
defeated and it shall be
bifurcated as set forth below in section
803D. So if it fails at referendum, it
becomes bifurcated.
Anyone
else? There's some back here.
I'll get to you in a second.
[Music]
Dennis Tammer, 23 Shotty Mill Road. I
just have a question on the um way that
the NS surplus is now being handled. um
instead of coming under a improvement
fund, it's all all of the surplus money
is now going into just an AES surplus
infrastructure fund
capital improvement fund. And so from
year to year, that number is going to
change because it's after their audit.
Correct. whatever is left is going to go
into just that fund. And I appreciate
that our town uses some of that leftover
tax money the next year to offset
increases
um because we've already paid taxes on
that money. So, I'm always one that
appreciates that we use that leftover
money. And I'm just worried if there
isn't
a cap or a limit on that extra money
from the AES fund because I will support
the budget. But I'm just worried that
that fund is going to grow grow and it's
only going to be used for the school
when that money shouldn't all be used
for the school if there's that much
surplus. we should be using it to run
our government the next year because
we've already paid taxes on that money.
So, I think that's something that should
be considered and looked at. Again, um
I'm not sure when or where this came up,
but I think I should have a cap also on
how much goes into that infrastructure
fund.
Okay, it's a definitely a fair question.
So just a couple of clarifications and
explanation to how it works because it's
a little bit complicated, you know,
battling or whatever. K jump in. This is
so basically state law says that it it
up to 2% of any surplus um that occurs
in in the uh education uh budget
automatically rolls into a non-lapsing
account uh for things in school like
school improvements. Okay, that's not
enough to fund the chains and the
improvements are going to be needed at
Andover Elementary, we all recognize
that uh when we establish the uh capital
fund for Andover Elementary, and we did
vote to put a fair amount of money in
there. Uh that being said, it's a fair
point. You don't want it to grow like
that year over year. Um if we're running
that kind of surplus all the time, I say
personally, I think that that's a bad
sign. I don't expect that we will. uh
but we did it in uh in the the past
fiscal year. Okay. And the quarter of
financing would certainly be incumbent
upon us to review that very closely if
that continue to get it. And if you
decided to not permit that money surplus
to go back into that capital fund, it
would then just be absorbed back into
the town's funds. So absolutely that's
what would happen. We again we we voted
on it this year. We agreed that we
should move that money into the capital
fund. They've got a lot of big
improvements they need to make. Uh we've
got some infrastructure problems over
there and uh parking lot was an issue
last year. The bathrooms are an issue.
We've got a failing uh uh uh elevator
system that's uh is is needed every day.
So, totally agree. Can't you can't just
let that go out of control. We've got to
watch that and it's going to be coming
up on the board finance to do that.
Good evening. I'm Shannon Brown. Um 248
Paris Road. Just to uh emphasize what
Mark just said, two things need to
happen for the board of education to be
allowed to move money into either our 2%
non-labs account or the capitalist fund
and that is to get the permission of the
board finance. So it is not something we
can unilaterally do. We have to ask
permission of the board finance. By law,
we can put 2% into our non-lasset
account, which means it doesn't lax. And
by virtue of a policy that was just
ended this past year, we can now because
we have such significant improvements
that need to be made to our capital and
we don't have a separate capital fund
asked for our any surplus in our budget
after the audit to be put into our
capital
funding. The thing I wanted to comment
on is this. Last year, the town voted
for a 16% increase to the town's
budget. The reason we don't have an
increase in the town's budget this year,
that in fact can benefit from a little
decrease in the town's budget is because
we gave the town a 16% increase in the
town's budget last year. The board of
education is now asking for half of
that. and we're asking for half of that
at a time that's critical in the
development of our school. We now have a
student population that is one-third
more than it's been and we have 240 plus
students going to this school. We
incredibly need that so that we don't
have classroom sizes in excess of 25 or
30 students. So for everybody who thinks
that we have classroom sizes of 10 or
15, please look at our monthly agenda
because it tells you how many students
are in our classrooms. Fourth, fifth,
and sixth grade are now about 25
students. Those are the students who
will eventually wander, so they won't
always get the benefit of the band
decreasingly levy. But right now, we
need an increase in our teacher
population.
3.1 is full-time
employee. We need at least that to to
satisfy the needs of our student
population.
That's to keep the classroom sizes at a
level that's not terrific students. It's
a size that's manageable for our
teachers, which is absolutely critical.
As I said, what we've seen by putting in
a prek is that we now have 60 students
in our pre kindergarten classes. That
gets students who are three and four
years old into our student
population. They're no longer going to
magnet schools. Previously, we had to
pay in excess of $5,000 per student on
top of what you pay in taxes to send a
student to a magnet school.
We don't do that very much anymore
because we get the students in at the
pre-k level at three and four years old
and they stay in our
school. So we are seeing right now class
sizes of about 25 in fourth, fifth and
sixth grade. Those are going to continue
to come through because we've got them
in prek going forward. We therefore
don't just need this budget increase
now. We're not making a one-time
request. We're going to need it for the
future. We need these teachers now, for
this next year, and in the future to
meet the needs of our student
population. Thanks very
much. Anyone else want to go back to
John? You see no hands.
not within the week side. So, I like to
go back to the town budget and um
16%. Last year, I took a little took the
wind out of my sales champion. And that
was a lot. And we have a lot of spending
that's gone on during this current
administration for public works
vehicles, uh backhoes, trucks, and
staff. And I think that we've hit a
saturation point. We don't have any more
miles of roads in this town, but we've
got five public works people and there
are extra projects to that level and we
needed two more people. Um, so I think
that's something we should look at. The
other thing is the again the community
center. Um, highly staffed, you know,
staffed a lot of staff there and then
there's item number under senior
centers.
Better get my
readers I'd like
to under senior citizens uh 4417 I would
like to
ask someone you know the board of
finance um board select um what exactly
is resident services coordinator if we
have we're
spending two people in our community
center, senior center. Now, what what is
this this number here?
$6,110 for a resident services
coordinator. Wouldn't one of the people
in the community center take care of
this? What what exactly is
this? And none of the board finance
wants to handle it.
Y I'm closer. Okay.
So this is uh it is my understanding
this is a a mandated position by state
law. Eric coming in right. Right. Uh so
one part of that job is mandated by
state law. Yeah. So one part of that job
is mandated by state law. Um we did
discuss in a board of finance meeting
with Eric went back and forth about
potentially offloading that work and
those uh those activities into uh the
community center director and basically
the answer was that they don't have the
bandwidth if you don't fund this
position I'll have to do it somewhere
else. Am I remembering the basic gist of
that conversation? Yeah. So we decided
to leave that in there for now. Of
course, we'll do that as we go on. The
community center is new, staffing is
new. We really kind of have to see all
how long that plays out. But that was
the decision.
Anyone else? Mark, go back.
So, as anybody that watches the board of
finance meetings knows, I'm not as
afraid to speak up. I'm usually the one
that's making motions. And um since you
did ask, I I appreciate the synopsis
that our chairman gave, but I did bring
it up also and I'd like to let the
taxpayers know that this position from
what I've been able to investigate.
Anytime I make a decision to ask for a
change or a cut, I do a lot of research.
It's very hard when you're talking about
a person, a beloved person that maybe
works at the town hall and has taken on
a task when another person left and
they've taken it on for an additional
stipend. I work in a school system and
as anyone that works in a school system
knows, there's times you may be asked to
take on a stipen to do extra work. So
there might be a year I get it or they
might have someone available to do that
work the next time.
So, um, you know, they come and go. So,
we were thankful that this beloved
person at the town hall did that work.
So, my idea was now that we brought on,
so happy to have the senior community
center. And now that we brought on two
workers that weren't there, it kind of
made sense for the taxpayers in town,
which is why I was elected, to do the
dirty work and look into the weeds,
bring up suggestions, maybe put my face
to it. People aren't going to be that
happy with me. But if I find something
where there could be a little bit of
savings, so we could spend it somewhere
else, I'm going to do it. So that's what
I did in this case. We brought on um you
know a part-time worker who the board of
finance thought we were hiring a
full-time worker for the same amount of
salary but we weren't part of that. So
then we had another worker. So our
thought with this position every town I
found out has to have a municipal agent
for the elderly. So great service, great
person that is there and gives the
information, answers the question,
access this agent.
Um, I took time to call many, many
senior centers and ask them if they fill
that dual role of mun municipal agent
for the elderly. And they do indeed do
that. Towns that are so much bigger than
us, you know, twice the size of us.
We're a tiny town, I like to call us,
3,000 residents. So my idea was just as
hard as it was, this person that gets
this title, which currently costs the
town, 6,100
it gets funneled into some retirement
amounts. So, it's costing the taxpayers
$7,400 in the current budget. My idea
was there be enough notice to this
person that thank you so much for your
service, but we're not going to fund
that this year because we now have two
people in the senior center that might
be able to take on that role. So, that's
my explanation. I did make the motion
and it was denied. There may be a time
later tonight. that someone wanted to
take that on. Again, you know, it's a
cut to a line there. Again, I don't get
personal because if I get personal and
think of the person, I can't operate
that way. To me, it would have been
great if our manager in the town kind of
steamrolled this and it was well thought
of ahead of time. And this isn't a a
knock on him. It's just the way that I
would work. It was the time you could
kind of have two new people coming into
an office taking on the duties behind
the scenes talking to the beloved worker
that already took on these duties and
tell her that there might be a change.
So, thank
you for meeting
Robera Dhy to Merit Valley Road.
I am the resident service coordinator
here at the town of Andover. I've been
doing this job since 2019 when the
previous resident service coordinator
who worked a total of 5 hours a week
retired. I came in at a time when we had
no money. I took over this position that
was being paid at one point in time
$10,000 a
year. I worked 34 hours a week in the
town hall. If somebody comes
in, I'm there. The previous person was
only there five hours a week and only
took phone calls when they were working
those 5 hours a week. So, if you were
somebody that needed something for
social services or from the municipal
agent, they would only take your calls
during those five hours that they were
working.
We also have the new part-time
coordinator of the senior center and
they're less than part-time person
working in the office as well. They are
not there 34 hours a week to take those
calls and help those people as they walk
in. It is strange for the social
services coordinator to be in the
assessor's office because that is my
full-time
job. But I can tell you why it works.
When you have a question with your taxes
and you have things that qualify you for
exemptions like being disabled or
elderly, I've already have that in my
office. I'm the one that provides those
exemptions on your taxes if you can
prove that you
qualify. Those needs might need
something else like where you can go get
food stamps, where you can go get
services.
You don't have to tell your story to me
and then walk over to the senior center
and tell the the director there your
whole story of what what you need and
what they can do for
you. Right now it works and I enjoy
doing it and I enjoy serving the
community. I just wanted to you to
understand what I do and where I do it.
If you have questions I'm happy to
answer them for you.
[Applause]
I call the blessing.
I hope I'm not talking very loud here
and I
hope you can hear.
Yes, you can hear. Okay. Thank you. Um,
I just want to say something. Okay, I am
retired. I have been senior coordinator
for the town of Vandor for 26 years. In
those 26 years, I did do the municipal
agent work as well as senior
coordinator. I enjoy the job and I have
always said and I'm going to say it
tonight and everyone's going to be very
angry. The job deserves to get paid. Uh,
there's no doubt about it. I know in the
in the rules or the charter or something
it does say that we shouldn't uh have
any uh volunteer. I was your volunteer.
I was your volunteer for 26 years. Now I
have to tell you we need to pay. I'm not
saying we need to pay a lot of money.
Sorry the bird. I'm not saying that. I'm
saying yes we need to pay. And so let's
just talk about something else. Let's
talk about the senior center. I'm going
to call her the senior center. You can
call the community and senior center,
whatever you'd like. I was on that
committee. I work on that committee, my
husband and I, helping to hopefully
build something that we would be proud
of. I think we are proud of this
building. I'd like to see more people
come to the building. It's been very
unfortunate. I retired in December, but
uh we've had a few health problems and
not been able to attend as much as I
want to. We're going to get back on
track. However, I want to say thank you
very much to the board of finance. I
think you have the worst job in the town
and I want to say also, I always thought
it was the board of selected that had
the worst job and now I've decided the
board of finance because every year you
get paid every year. Um, I want to just
say about the board of education. I
think we have a great school in town and
I'm sorry, guys. We need the pay. If
they need the money, they need the
money. And I'm hoping that Valerie and
Taylor, they're just great. And they've
been so good to us. I can't believe
they're putting the money in their
pocket for the schools for for I don't
know what the I don't care. Just I I
just don't believe it. That's all. And
perhaps I'll be wrong and you'll say you
don't know what you're talking about. I
probably don't. But anyway, thank you
very much and thank you board of
findings.
Thank you for all the questions. Is
someone going to second that motion?
Okay. Seconded by Deb. This motion is to
end
So I would recommend
okay this motion is to end the debate
for the discussion if you want to call
it
that. I will call for a rising vote on
this motion. All in favor of ending this
discussion, please rise.
This is to end the discussion and vote
on moving the budget forward.
Yeah, this is to stop this discussion.
Okay, you may sit down. All those
imposed want to continue with the
discussion. Please rise.
It's the opinion of the moderator. The
motion is passed.
Here we go.
The discussion is over on both was just
made. No.
Are you going to make a motion to reduce
the line item or the budget?
Do I have to hold it for discussion? You
have to make the motion. And the motion
has to be seconded before that can be
open for discussion.
You can make the motion to reduce a line
item or the bottom line.
and someone has to second it and then we
go to discussion.
Give me a motion to find the line.
I would like to make a motion to
um reduce it's under employee benefits.
It's 141. that the account is
141215. I think I have found something
that there was a mistake on the
spreadsheet. So, I would like to make a
motion to reduce that line.
I have
$25,000. If you go on
uh what page is ital?
So page six of 14 under employee
benefits. It's the third one down is the
health/ dental insurance line
141215. So I'd like to make that motion
because when you make a motion you open
it for discussion.
Anyone want to
share those people?
Okay. So,
I was going to ask earlier to get some
feedback from our town manager, Eric
Anderson, and then hopefully that we
have our computer open. Just today, I
was, you know, we've been pouring
through these spreadsheets. What you're
seeing is a small little microcosm of
what we've been doing. And in the past
week, I've been learning how the
spreadsheets have been set up because we
don't set them up. So, we found multiple
formulas, multiple things that feed in.
We've been making corrections. We've all
been working as a board to do this. And
just today, in a final thing, in a final
going through my notes to bring here
tonight, I wanted to ask Mr. Anderson, I
believe there's a mistake in this and I
feel like the the total that was brought
over is the the health um insurance
benefit the total whereas usually when
you work in a school system or a town
agency, you pay a portion of your
benefits. So I feel like they imported
the wrong total.
So the bottom line I'm looking at here
is
239954. So I have this page. All of you
can see. I was scribbling this before I
got here trying to come up with a total,
but I didn't want to be late for the
meeting. But I feel confident that if
I'm right, it's probably going to be
higher than what I'm motioning to
reduce. I want to reduce by 20,000. I'd
like to send it that for the
corrections. We've gotten a legal
opinion from our town attorney that if
the board of finance agrees and if you
find a mistake that it can be corrected.
I happen to know he's here tonight. Um
you know it's just a mistake in the
clerical work that we don't do. We don't
put it together. But I just I get it
like I said and I found this. So I
wanted to bring it to the attention. Um,
I think the total is the combination of
what the town pays and the employee pays
and that's what's been represented for
the taxpayers. So, if I'm wrong, I'm
wrong, but I'd rather bring it up.
was asking because
So there's an amount that is the town
amount. If you go down, if you scroll
down, we here this amount here is the
health insurance including a 7% increase
which shows us that amount for a single
employee. Then we add this HSA payment
that the town has to pay. We pay the
dental cost. So it's the total right
here. However, look at this for just the
healthcare. when you go down below and
we're given if you scroll down we're
given the math where they figure this
out. Okay, so it's supposed to be per
year that
amount. So when I was doing f fast math
today, it should have
been see how this total is going to be
three. It shouldn't.
We're allowed to make a correction. So,
if I found it, I at least want them to
look at it. Yeah.
This is not a correction per se. This is
an actual motion to reduce a line item
so that everyone understands
I give them just as difficult as
terrifying story.
Yes.
[Music]
I'm sorry. I'm trying what you're trying
to figure out. Someone has a question.
Here you are.
It was.
Yeah. Sorry.
So it's negative
right now.
So
money and this is right, you know, it's
supposed to be just
[Music]
So just a followup, the spreadsheet
formulas appear to be correct. Now, the
data that was put into the spreadsheet,
Joan thinks it's incorrect because
there's reference below it that says
it's a slightly less money for rent
2,000 employee or for a
family. So, the finance director is not
here, you can specifically answer that
question. So, what I would just say as a
taxpayer, we get one of two choices. We
can uh vote to approve this amendment or
this motion reduce the budget by the
amount that is as motives presented. Uh
and if it turns out that the numbers are
correct, we'll have to find that money
from somewhere else, the contingency
fund. If it turns out that he or we can
also decide to uh not pass the motion,
leave it as is. And if it turns out that
it really was less, then the town will
have a surplus. Those are our two
options. just kind of stay in what I
think will happen. Who knows?
Okay, we have a motion on the floor line
at
$20,000. Motion has been made, seconded,
and discussed. Is there any further
questions?
I'd rather not your table order to the
floor. I ask everyone three minutes.
Well, I am not arguing with anyone. I
have spent so much time the last three
weeks trying to go through this. So, I
just want to be able to clarify.
Yeah. I just want to Yes.
So, I think that we could go so much
higher than this, but I don't want to do
that to the town. So, I feel comfortable
that I made the motion to reduce by
20,000. I have a feeling that this
happened year after year. So, I feel
confident in the numbers and so that's
why I'm only limiting it to a $20,000.
Oh, did
I
get that one?
I'm usually not that bad. It must be all
the hours I'm devoting to this time, but
I'll go in the middle. Thank you for
correcting that it's 25. So, I feel
comfortable that it's going to come up
higher. Um, and that's it. I I did do
the research on it. I know that I didn't
have time to know the they've gotten a
million emails for me in this past two
weeks. So, I just just discovered it
today. That's all. Thank you, Wally.
You all have when you came in the door
packing seven ballots. This would be
ballot number
one. If you vote yes, you are reducing
the
budget by 20,000
$25,000. If you vote no, you are not
voting to reduce the budget. Remark
ballot number one. The register can come
around and lift up your ballot. We'll be
in recess for one minute to please.
[Music]
So, it's been 3 years.
Very good job.
Yeah. Here's the
[Music]
station. What the
We're all
Come back again.
I know.
We hear you all, buddy.
All
right. Other motions to reduce any blind
eye, but are there any motions?
So, I've said that many times tonight.
Public works is over half a million
dollars. It is growing and growing. It
has grown substantially over this
current administration with vehicles
staffing and they have the same mileage.
So, I'd like to make a motion to reduce
public works by $50,000.
139 salary
linear salary line is fine. We've got
we've grown from three people to five
people to part-time people to summer
help. There we go. We did two teams. Now
we have two teams in the supervisor.
We've gotten tax increases the last
bunch of years. I couldn't assume. Thank
you. Is there a second to that motion?
Lori Artino.
Okay. A motion has been made. Seconded.
Any discussion?
Let me just say
um roads in this town in this town uh
back in town select person instead of
administrator current board I know where
I live now was a shame. It was
absolutely falling apart. It was it was
nothing but pops. Uh the roads were not
getting mowed regularly. Dead trees
weren't being taken down. uh there's
more people because there's work being
done now to improve the infrastructure
of the town. You can't do more with the
same amount of people. So I think
that oh build erosion won't
sorry further discussion on the motion.
Okay. If there's no further
discussion, ballot number
two of the packet will be at the
door. Yes. Is to reduce this line item.
No was not to reduce the line item.
I'm glad she
[Music]
camera straight anyway.
real quick.
Okay.
[Music]
We're about to get
just
I don't care.
Everyone turn up on the second vote.
Okay. The first
item that we voted on
reducing for the public
section was 44 yes 63 no. The motion was
defeated.
Now working on the
shepherd
together can hear you. Thank you.
Dennis Gam 23 Shiny Mill Road under
section 4214 Community Center. I'd like
to make a motion to cut the community
center assistant position uh line item
by $10,712.
Is there a second to that motion?
I'm not sure it's a I'll send it.
discussion.
I'm not in favor of this at all because
we definitely need her name is Kim as
any of you know her and she's a
fantastic asset to us and we cannot
afford to cut her position because first
of all the new director is has she has
little experience. She's doing her best,
but she needs care and Kim needs to I'm
going to say to you, get this one. Pick
up this one. Do not please do not cut
her. Please do not.
[Applause]
[Music]
Louise makes side
I very much agree with um Kim has been
an asset.
Uh Tess has been a great asset. She's
doing a great job at the senior center.
We are starting to volunteers. We need
more volunteers. And without the
volunteers, you know, it she leaves, she
goes home after dinner. She doesn't get
paid. Neither are home. Both of them are
there after 2:00. We don't get to meet
anything for them. And I produce it.
[Applause]
Further discussion of the
moment number. Um, mine is kind of just
a question. Why did the salad kill?
That's what I was trying to ask before
someone the question. Why did it go from
5,000 to 10,000?
I don't think we should definitely
[Music]
So this past summer, we hired a director
for the senior and community center and
the original intention of that was to
have that person
performed three basic roles. The first
was
uh dealing with all things related to
the senior center. The second was uh
community programming for the senior
center and the third was to take over
and be kind of the
liaison for all the recreational
activities for the town. The goal being
everything that was community centered
to fall under one umbrella. Uh the
original budget for the director was
reduced last year by the board of
finance. Um we did interview I think a
total of five candidates. Uh we went
back to we had a preferred candidate um
one alternate and one emergency fall
advocate. uh all three of the candidates
we interviewed would not have taken the
position for the amount of money that
the board of finance uh allocated to the
position. So we were forced to hire that
position as part-time. Um so I
negotiated enough less than the cap that
I had some money remaining. Um, and also
that we had originally budgeted that
person to as a full-time employee, you
know, you're eligible for health care
both for yourself and a spouse. So, we
were able to hire somebody for less than
we had budgeted, number one, and number
two, that they were willing to take fee
in lie of instead of healthcare. So, I
took the money saved from those two
things and used it to hire an assistant
for that position because, you know, we
pretty clearly needed more man hours or
woman hours in this case uh at that
position. So, this budget uh we're not
increasing the hours for the assistant
in this budget, nor are we increasing
the salary, the hourly wage for this
that person. Um it was simply something
that was not budgeted guess in last
budget but the money was available
because we took it from unused money
from benefits and also from the salary
from the director. So that's where it
was in this year. That money doesn't
show up in the benefits category because
the benefits have been adjusted based on
the actual personnel we have but it
shows up in the salary line item. That
answers your question.
Further questions or comments?
Hearing
none, we'll call for a vote. This would
be ballot number
three to reduce by
10,000.
All right. So, you got ballot numbers
for you. Yes.
And for
public works balance
91 no 18 yes
benefit tax for this excuse me the
salary line item for public work is not
will not be reduced.
and register will be around collecting
your ballots. Again, this is ballot
number three.
The public works
91 no 18 yes was defeated.
So that has not been reduced.
[Music]
valid hurry. I know. I just wanted to be
clear. So, I'll say it again. If you can
have a vote after this by standing or
not, by rising or not, my my motion was
to call the question on voting for or
against the budget, which I thought
would have ended the session in motions.
So, my motion is to call the question on
voting in favor or not of the question.
Okay. You want to make a motion right
now to vote on the final budget? I do.
After we count these balance, if you
could, please. Is there a second?
All those in favor of voting on the full
budget. Please rise.
I don't think I need to count. Thank
you.
done. Now we're going to setting it for
I would
not wait. Oh, wait.
Thank
you. Awesome.
[Music]
turn you down.
You signed up for
event Saturday. Yeah. On the 19th.
All right. Technically,
the vote to send the
budget to referendum. No. It's kind of a
loop point because if you look at the
town charter, it automatically goes to
referendum.
But as a matter of giving people a
chance, all those in favor of accepting
the town budget and sending it to
referendum, please say I. I.
Those opposed,
nay. the opinion of the chair. The
budget goes to referendum.
In the meantime, fine. Item four is in
order. If someone wants to make said
motion,
is there a second?
All in favor of adjourning, say I. I.
Those opposed.
Meeting adjourned. Uh yeah, the horn